vicky young there our chief political
correspondent uh in downing street well
inside number 10
prime minister has been preparing that
statement
um so it's just coming up to eight
o'clock that now follows a ministerial
broadcast from the prime minister boris
johnson
good evening the struggle against kovid
is the single biggest crisis the world
has faced
in my lifetime in less than a year
this disease has killed almost a million
people and caused havoc to economies
everywhere
here in the uk we mourn every person we
have lost and
we grieve with their families and yet
i'm more certain than ever that this is
a struggle that humanity
will win and we in this country will win
and to achieve what we must i want to
talk to you
directly tonight about the choices that
we face
none of them easy and why we must take
action
now i know that we can succeed
because we have succeeded before when
the sickness took hold
in this country in march we pulled
together
in a spirit of national sacrifice and
community
we followed the guidance to the letter
we stayed at home
protected the nhs and saved thousands
of lives and for months with those
disciplines of social distancing we've
kept that virus
at bay but we have to acknowledge
that this is a great and freedom loving
country and while
the vast majority have complied with the
rules there have been
too many breaches too many opportunities
for our invisible enemy to slip through
undetected
the virus has started to spread again in
an exponential way
infections are up hospital emissions are
climbing
we can see what's happening in france
and spain
and we know alas that this virus
is no less fatal than it was in the
spring and
the vast majority of our people are no
less
susceptible and the iron laws of
geometrical progression
are shouting at us from the graphs that
we risk
many more deaths many more families
losing loved ones before their time
and i know that faced with that risk the
british people
will want their government to continue
to fight to protect them you and that's
what we're doing
night and day and yet the single
greatest weapon we bring to this fight
is the common sense of the people
themselves
the joint resolve of this country to
work together
to suppress kovid now
so today i set out a package of tougher
measures in england
early closing for pubs bars table
service only
closing businesses that are not coping
secure expanding the use of face
coverings
new fines for those that fail to comply
once again asking office workers to work
from home
if they can while enforcing the rule of
six
indoors and outdoors a tougher package
of national measures combined with the
potential
for tougher local restrictions for areas
already
in lockdown i know that this approach
robust but proportionate already carries
the support of all the main parties
in parliament after discussion with
colleagues in the devolved
administrations
i believe this broad approach is shared
across the whole
uk and to those who say
we don't need this stuff and we should
leave people
to take their own risks i say these
risks are not our own
the tragic reality of having covet
is that your mild cough can be someone
else's
death knell and as for the suggestion
that we should simply
lock up the elderly and the vulnerable
with all the suffering that would entail
i must tell you
that this is just not realistic because
if you
let the virus rip through the rest of
the population
it would inevitably find its way through
to the elderly
as well and in much greater numbers
that's why we need to suppress the virus
now and as for that minority
who may continue to flout the rules we
will enforce
those rules with tougher penalties and
fines
of up to ten thousand pounds we will put
more police out on the streets and
use the army to backfill if necessary
and of course i'm deeply spiritually
reluctant
to make any of these impositions or
infringe
anyone's freedom but unless we take
action the risk is that we will have to
go
for tougher measures later when the
deaths have already mounted
and we have a huge caseload of infection
such as we had in the spring if we let
this virus
get out of control now it would mean
that our nhs
had no space once again to deal with
cancer patients and
millions of other non-covered medical
needs
and if we were forced into a new
national lockdown that would threaten
not just jobs and livelihoods but
the loving human contact on which we all
depend it would mean renewed loneliness
and confinement for the elderly and
vulnerable
and ultimately it would threaten once
again the education
of our children we must
do all we can to avoid going down that
road
again but if people don't follow the
rules we've set out
then we must reserve the right to go
further
we must take action now because the
stitch in time saves nine
and this way we can keep people in work
we can keep our shops and our schools
open
and we can keep our country moving
forward while
we work together to suppress the virus
that is our strategy and if we can
follow this package together
then i know we can succeed because
in so many ways we're better prepared
than before we have the
ppe we have the beds we have the
nightingales we have new medicines
pioneered in this country that can help
save lives and though our doctors and
our medical advisors are rightly worried
about the data now and the risks over
winter they are unanimous that things
will be
far better by the spring when we have
not only the hope of a vaccine but one
day soon
and i must stress that we're not there
yet
of mass testing so efficient that people
will be able
to be tested in minutes so they can do
more
of the things they love that's the hope
that's the dream
it's hard but it's attainable and we're
working as hard as we can
to get that but until we do
we must rely on our willingness to
look out for each other to protect each
other
never in our history as our collective
destiny
and our collective health depended so
completely
on our individual behavior
if we follow these simple rules together
we will get through
this winter together there are
unquestionably
difficult months to come and the fight
against kovid is by no means over
and i have no doubt however that there
are great days
ahead but now is the time
for us all to summon the the discipline
and the resolve and the spirit of
togetherness that will carry us through
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest
with bbc news